everybody andrew holicic here and
i simply cannot
contain my excitement about my guest for
today
dr christopher beige and so
with uh
a brief introduction we're going to
launch in to what i believe will be
quite a revelatory and i hope
provocative conversation
so chris phd is professor emeritus in
the department of philosophy and
religious studies at youngstown
youngstown state university where he
taught for 33 years
he is also adjunct faculty at the
california institute of medical studies
emeritus fellow at the institute of
melodic sciences
and on the advisory board of growth
legacy training
chris's passion has been the study of
the philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
especially psychedelic states
an award-winning teacher and
international speaker chris has written
four books life cycles a study of
reincarnation in light of contemporary
consciousness research
dark knight early dawn
a pioneering work in psychedelic
philosophy and collective consciousness
the living classroom and exploration of
collective fields of consciousness and
teaching
and lsd in the mind of the universe the
story of his 20-year journey with lsd
chris is a father of three of adriana
practitioner and lives in weaverville
north carolina with his wife christina
hardy
oh my gosh chris
where do we start right first of all
thank you my dear friend for for taking
time out of your busy schedule to talk
with us it's a pleasure really i've been
looking forward to this one for a while
and so
oh my gosh just some preparatory
comments before we launch in um
[Music]
i have read a fair amount um over my
years i consider myself
bit of a
an academic i love to read i love to
devour books and i have to say i have
never read anything like your last book
lsd and the mind of the universe and so
out of all the books that you've written
this is the one i really want to focus
on because
it's no exaggeration to say that it
really stretched my mind open challenged
me and maybe we can talk about some of
the areas where i was challenged
created both tremendous resonance
with my own path and also some
dissonance and so
that's a great way to make modern music
right
so maybe maybe we can create a symphony
of sanity with with uh some questions to
you
um of which there is no shortage but one
kind of preparatory comment um
there's a term by the eco philosopher
timothy morton that i really quite like
he talks about hyper objects
and he refers to this in relationship to
climate change when you have something
that is just
so enormous yeah that is really
difficult to wrap your mind around it it
just defies description it's literally
mind-bending mind stretching and then
maybe even mind-blowing yeah and it's no
exaggeration the your book in your
journey
is a hyper object to me um
and i can't
tell you how it's impacted me and how i
want to
really get into some of the nitty-gritty
of what you went through
but in order to give our listeners uh
even a rough idea of what we're going to
be talking about perhaps give us a a
long elevator pitch okay so this is a
we have a thousand floors to ascend
right so this is a long elevator pitch
share with us if you would um
a little bit about this book
um before we get into the weeds and and
i start exploring particular problems
with you yeah
well i know it's a radical book
and i think we are at a pivot point in
history and i think that psychedelics
represent a major
transition point a true historical
before and after point with respect to
philosophy not just psychology
it generates not only a new therapeutic
protocol for healing the personal psyche
but literally a new way of doing
philosophy it's not really new because
it goes back to the illusionian
mysteries and
the ayahuasca traditions in brazil
but i got involved in it right out of
graduate school
i had just finished my phd from brown
university i went to work in ohio
at youngstown state i was looking around
for where to begin where to continue my
research i was a pretty deeply convinced
agnostic at the time
and i encountered realms of the human
unconscious stan gross first book and
that was a turning point in my life
quickly followed by his methodology book
lsd psychotherapy this was 1978 when i
began graduate school
and i saw the significance of his work
for philosophy for my tradition which
was philosophy of
religion
and i
i knew that i needed to do this work
that this would the people making the
most substantive contributions to my
discipline in the future would be people
writing out of an experiential basis not
simply an intellectual basis
so i began to work privately um
i split my life into two
on my day job i was a traditional
academic you know teaching courses
grading papers going to meetings and all
that
and in my private life i began a 20-year
journey working following stan groff's
protocol
i ended up working with high doses of
lsd for reasons i described in the book
this is a very aggressive protocol it's
not a protocol that i would recommend
today
at the end of the journey but i
basically did 73 high-dose lsd sessions
let me say that each session was
completely isolated i was separated from
the world
i was in what i call the psychedelic
kiva a very protected environment
separate from the world lying down with
the sitter
my sitter was a clinical psychologist
who also happened to be my wife through
all of my sessions
uh
wearing eye shades
and with headphones listening to very
carefully selected music to support the
deepening of the process so that's where
i began i worked for four years
i stopped for six years again for
reasons that i give in the book and then
i resume for another 10 years
and the method the the psychedelic
method as a philosophical method
involves systematically expanding the
boundaries of one's consciousness
and let me say that we understand
that psychedelics in general and lsd in
particular
repre is an amplifier of consciousness
it doesn't give you any specific
experiences it amplifies your
consciousness makes you hypersensitive
for a number of hours at a time
how you use that hypersensitivity
very much influences what emerges over a
long period of time
if you go to a concert or you just sit
down chat with friends you're going to
have a certain level of experience but
if you approach these hours in a
contemplative manner if you approach
them as
an opportunity to go deep within your
consciousness
totally internalize isolating yourself
from the world
a journey begins
it's a journey that has many levels
because as we confront all the things
that a hypersensitive mind throws up to
us to confront and it usually starts
with all the fears all the things we're
ashamed of all the things we're
unhappy about
those are the early confrontations that
lead to a
the healing process
but if you keep that up it keeps going
deeper and deeper and deeper
if you navigate this uh this journey
carefully i always recorded my sessions
within 24 hours and and that's really
important because the more careful you
are in recording your session and
pondering them the clearer the deeper
your next session is likely to be so
there's a circle of learning that's
involved so for 20 years i kept up this
systematic practice
and then i waited i stopped it i went
from 79 to 99
and then i didn't write lsd in the in
the universe i didn't publish it until
20 years later in 2019
i spent many years analyzing my
experiences pondering them trying to
sort them out
before i was ready to really um
publicly
uh release this hidden side of my life
my students never learned about my
psychedelic work i kept a firewall
between my public life and my private
life in this regard and it's only after
i retired from the university
that i've really been willing to go
public on this side of my life
amazing even there there's so much to
talk about let me just
if i might ping one question for you
just briefly i am a musician my first
degree is actually in classical piano
and so
just briefly
why
why music what was the role of music
and
how did it help you how did you choose
it i don't want to spend a ton of time
on this yeah but but i am interested uh
where where did that inspiration come
from and how did how did it end up
supporting your journey there's early
research done on how music influences
psychedelic sessions
um
i have references to that to them those
sources in my work basically it creates
a a field an
ambiance that supports you
letting go of your current physical
reality relaxing and yielding to this
uprushing of material that comes from
the unconscious there are about five
stages in the psychedelic session as the
energy is building as it's peaking and
as you're coming down it's hours you
know it's eight hours of the day
and you have to choose music to support
each stage of that process so the music
would be very aggressive and very
long chordal sequences with powerful
crescendos in the early stages
long expansive
passages in the middle stages gradually
tapering off into quieter and quieter
and gentler music at the end after
after only a year or so i basically
stopped using classical music which is
more commonly used
i shifted to using a lot of indigenous
music because i found it to be more
powerfully evocative it helped me
go into let go of my conventional
reality and enter into
unusual reality well that's really
interesting chris because it
um in the inner yogas of contract
buddhism which i know you're a student
of the vajrayana
yeah as you know the the subtle body is
actually the kind of frequency of the
the
domain that is literally quite in
resonance with sound and so when we're
actually
touched by music it's really our subtle
body that is touched and this is really
interesting to me because
when you talk about this journey which
in one way and i'd be curious to see if
this resonates with you i i i really
appreciated your frequent allusions to
the work of carl jung
and
um i don't remember you saying this
overtly but the process of individuation
how it is the bringing the unconscious
processes into the light of conscious
awareness is what in fact constitutes
one vector of awakening and so the
reason this is interesting to me
is that the subtle body is is also
connected to the unconscious mind and so
in a certain way um and let me see if
this is landing with you
when you're working with this type of
music it's almost as if you're creating
a tuning fork an invitational harmonic
in external auditory mechanisms or
mediums that therefore could perhaps
evoke correlative inner qualities that
help you in fact bring these processes
into light of consciousness is it fair
to say something like that i think
that's fair you know basically
i think that's a good description the
subtle body is very actively involved in
the psychedelic process
when you open up into deeper states of
consciousness i learned that deeper
states of consciousness are higher
levels of energy and so it places
enormous demands on your physical body
but particularly their subtle energy
body and so um it's it's very the subtle
energy body is very much involved it's a
very you're moving into highly
stimulated states which are not simply
psychologically stimulating but they're
energetically subtle energetically
stimulating and physically stimulating
yeah that really makes so much sense to
me but i want to put an exclamation
point and return to
something that you intimated that you
also ping on later in your book
connected to this kind of amplification
using these agents
as means to heighten awareness and
amplifying the mind and what you said at
the end really struck me because in fact
i was a student of
uh shogun trump
a statement that i always took from him
to be pejorative negative that lsd is
super samsara i originally heard that as
a negative
your twist on it was fantastically
alchemical or tantric because now you
put a positive spin on it
that in a very beautiful way
the super samsara gives you the
opportunity to
bring these unconscious processes
into the light of awareness and
therefore i think that the word you use
is is confront even confrontation the
word you can say inner jihad right to
wrestle with these inner dimensions
as a way
again in the alchemical or contract
spirit
to transform these super samsara into
nirvana
through proper relationship is that is
that one way to talk about what you
experience as well
it is i want to i want to tag two items
there the first one
uh again it all depends
on how you meet this super samsara
sansara is very addictive it's very
distracting it's very alluring
and if you increase the the your
sensitivity to samsara it can take you
on a journey that just will just
distract you and lead you and uh it
really doesn't take you anywhere except
through into more samsara but if you use
this opportunity in a true contemplative
fashion to look deeply
at the samsara that's there
then you you find that you the samsara
will fall apart you would really take
the samsaric tendencies to their roots
and when you take them to their roots
they become uprooted and you begin to
move into deeper levels
deeper levels of samsara but then
eventually into the levels that go
beyond samsara into extra samsaric
levels of reality into the bardo but
then eventually into extrasome sorry
levels of reality now
i wanna the second point i wanna mention
is
people use psychedelics for many
different purposes some for recreation
some to hyper
stimulate creativity but three basic
purposes are therapeutic healing which
is the dominant way that people are
using psychedelics today in the
psychedelic renaissance to heal the
wounds
of life of the personal psyche
second for spiritual realization
to accelerate one's
awakening to accelerate the immune ones
awareness of nirvana are entering into
the condition of nirvana
and this is why i had started this is
what got me started like many people in
the late 70s into the psychedelic work
but eventually and very quickly really
that agenda
fell away in my practice partly because
of the very powerful
protocol that i
adopted personal enlightenment fell away
as not a significant part of my journey
it came back around in the end and it
was always there but it wasn't the
primary modality
collective awakening became very
important that is working on behalf of
the human family the bodhisattva
vow in a sense came through very
strongly but eventually my work settled
into
a third
agenda which i would call cosmological
exploration
the the
what my work became was a long journey
into
what i think of as the consciousness of
the universe or the consciousness of the
creative intelligence that's behind the
universe and within the universe
and you don't need to explore
all those deep
pathways in order to awaken spiritually
you don't need to go into archetypal
reality you don't need to go back to the
birth of the universe in order to awaken
to the truth of your essential nature as
the buddhist would say or to your christ
consciousness as the christians would
say
and so i wanted to
differentiate cosmological exploration
from the project of spiritual awakening
because if we hold
cosmological exploration to the
measures or criteria of success of
spiritual awakening i think i think
we're going to miss the mark of what's
actually taking place in the journey oh
my gosh chris
you're going to the deep end of the pool
yeah
wow so let's unpack this because i think
this is really interesting this is super
important in my opinion because it begs
a number of questions
one is the relationship
between
excuse me the individual and the
collective the individual and the cosmos
and and therefore deep
as a scholar of religion and philosophy
deep questions about
the nature of mind and reality that um i
guess to paraphrase it
i mean there's so many ways to get into
this but one one question that comes to
mind is
is it in fact the mind that's in the
universe or the universe that's in the
mind in other words what exactly is the
relationship between the individual and
the cosmic and is in fact
part of what i hear is a
dissonance potential dissonance for me
is a is a subtle um cosmological dualism
that there therefore seems to intimidate
a difference between the individual
and the cosmic that there's still some
sense of separation implied there
so let maybe help me understand that
tease that apart for me because if i
notice in one of your footnotes you talk
that if you were to pin yourself into a
corner philosophically you would you
would define yourself as a modest and so
how does monism play into this if in
fact you're intimating of subtle dualism
uh it's only a functional dualism which
all monastic traditions recognize um fun
at cora i'm a monist at heart and this
comes it's not a philosophical position
it's a it's an experiential position
um
the deeper one goes
into one's own consciousness eventually
come to that point where where
let me let me back up and start again
contemporary thought
scientific thought tends to see the
physical world as the only world that
exists
and they tend to see the physical world
as operating by mechanistic processes
that there is not consciousness in
atomic in chemical
processes and that consciousness somehow
pops into existence at some point in the
evolutionary
process
now there are lots of philosophical
reasons for challenging the adequacy of
that understanding of consciousness
and i
align with those philosophers who are
pan psychists who believe that
consciousness or the what you might
think of as ur consciousness a core
origin consciousness
is present in
physical reality or energetic reality
from the very start and that conscious
consciousness isn't added later but
consciousness is part of the emerging
universe from the big bang forward so
that just marked that okay
experientially when one
when one shatters one's personal mind
when when one reaches the limits where
your personal history can no longer
contain what's happening in your mind
and when you've excavated through the
various levels of your personal
unconscious
one drops into a larger field of
consciousness
part of that one of the part of the
field you drop into
is the field of your species mind and
here's the common ground with carl jung
the collective psyche but if you keep
working and dropping and dropping and
dropping you deep it drop into deeper
and deeper larger and larger levels of
consciousness until eventually you're in
very familiar very
territory that's very familiar to the
mystics
when they are talking about
god consciousness are talking about all
is one the experience
over and over again is that the entire
universe both its physical manifestation
and it's
the mind that underlies this
manifestation is fundamentally
a single organism
and that all life takes place within
this single singularity in all life is a
manifestation of an emergence of the
singularity in diversity
and
when we first began to discover this
underlying reality what i would call the
mother universe that underlies the
daughter universe of the physical world
during the axial age you know about
three to five thousand years ago
it was so
what we encountered when we began to get
have the the meditation techniques or
the psychedelic techniques in the early
hindu soma to drop into this reality it
was so intoxicating and so ecstasy
filled
that we developed an interpretation of
life that said that the purpose
the purpose of life was to get back to
that that there is nothing worth holding
on to in physical reality there is
nothing
worth holding on to in individuality
what you really want to do is take the
drop and put it back into the ocean you
want to dissolve ego and end up in back
into the oneness and i understand that
but i think it's a fundamentally
flawed cosmology now that we're
beginning to understand how old the
universe how big it is how intelligent
it is how
how long it's been working to bring
forward
the
more evolved forms of life that it has
to think that
after 13.7 billion years of evolution
when just a few thousand years ago we've
become self-conscious enough to be able
to penetrate
our individual consciousness and
discover this underlying cosm cosmic
consciousness which holds the entire
universe
just when we discover that
then we want to
dissolve and disappear
out of existence all together
to go home makes no sense i don't think
that's and what i've learned or what
i've been taught in my sessions
is that the universe
wants to support individuality not the
prism not not the individuality that's
imprisoned within solitary egoic
awareness
but a robust individuality of what we
might call the soul which is open and
porous and in constant exchange
with the larger rhythms of life this is
the both and position that
when one awakens spiritually
one literally becomes more of an
individual
than you were before you awakened
you know so there's a so there is a
i think that when we go deep we not only
discover the oneness
and we discover that that oneness is the
essence of our individual being classic
is problem the essence of the individual
is the essence of the totality but now
we discover that
brahman
delights
in manifesting atman and in growing
atman and in atman waking up to its own
true nature and then that waking up is
just a stage in a larger evolutionary
process of empowerment so that we
literally learn to become more and more
and more of a conscious synthesis
of individuality and spiritual
totality
oh chris oh my gosh i can hardly contain
myself here
i mean talk about diamonds from heaven i
mean
this is your journey you're not johnny
appleseed you're you're johnny diamond
siege your wife is
throwing diamonds but but let me just
maybe this is an issue of semantics and
and the nuance of talking
yeah
what a challenge when you start talking
about
um
nature of mind and reality using
dualistic mechanisms
you're headed into trouble so but help
me understand a couple of things
when
when you talk about um
the universe wants to support and and
there are other intimations in your
in your book that i found very
compelling how it is that you felt from
day one that there was a larger
intelligence that was guiding your
journey
that you felt held by the beloved
and and i remind me to come back to this
because i want to share a personal story
about my own retreat time
where this this came into real
dissonance with me
um as a as a practicing buddhist because
as you know on the buddhist tradition
their biggest one of their biggest
teachings is on emptiness uh
non-theism
and that sort of thing and so i'm i'm
wrestling a little bit with reconciling
things like nothingism and emptiness
with what you're talking about so
to be a little bit more articulate about
this
let's be point a little bit more
point-blank for my end how do you
reconcile mantheism
with this notion of universal
intelligence which almost seems to
intimidate a creator principle a god if
we dare say because you almost seem to
be implying that there is
a divine
transhuman intelligence god whatever
term you want to
depend to it that somehow is in fact
your beloved it is holding you guiding
you nurturing how do you reconcile that
with the teachings on emptiness and
non-theism
yeah
it's really not difficult
when you
when you move into it um
so
let's focus on the buddhist teaching of
anata no self emptiness of self
shunyatta
transp which can also be transparent
translated transparency
i think
i really endorse the buddhist position
of its radical agnosticism i think it's
an anti-theism so basically it's a
critique that says every theism which is
being proposed or has been proposed has
structural flaws to it that it so
the concept of god the concept of theism
uh
is critiqued as being
inadequate
and in its place buddhism proposes a
pure process
understanding of reality that everything
is dynamic everything is constantly
changing everything is fluid everything
is in process there is nothing which
holds its existence by itself you only
exist in the interplay of the whole
ocean of causality of karmic forces
cosmic down to
species down to individual it's all an
open system and when you when you wake
up
to your essential nature
you don't you don't wake up to a
separate thing you wake up to a fluid
process and you breathe now
the fluid process of existence
i take that to heart and that resonates
with my experience in that
every
i experienced myself as constantly being
guided and instructed and tutored in my
psychedelic sessions
but the nature of that consciousness
that held me and broke me down and and
opened me and then broke me down some
more the nature of that consciousness
never revealed itself as a being as a
person as a personality
and the very structure
of what it was that i was engaging
kept expanding and changing now
in psychedelic states you don't learn or
you learn by becoming what it is that
you're trying to learn about
you don't take the ego there and have an
experience of something you literally
shatter and you dissolve and become
this
so
my experience was that when i began to
become aware of this this other that was
holding me and guiding me and i began to
ask it who are you what are you
i experienced a death
which then dissolved me into a deeper
level of reality where i discovered that
i was
this was myself it was a deeper level of
quote myself not my personal self
capital m yeah
and this repeated itself over and over
and over for hours on this one
particular session until eventually it
brought me into the realization that
it's an endless progression
it's it's a seamless consciousness
within this vast consciousness
we are an individual consciousness
confronting an infinite consciousness
how we experience ourselves at the
moment of contact as we dissolve into it
influence what arises out of this
infinite consciousness
and that's that
awareness that
this consciousness that i was engaging
and discovered myself to be part of
was truly infinite and open-ended and
that i reached a point
15 years into the journey
where i discovered i would never reach
the end of it it was an infinite
progression no matter how many years i
did this work
there was always more to discover
so that means
and
that to me resonates very deeply with
the buddhist position on
uh its critique of theism its critique
of gods that have physical forms or the
critique of gods that are come out of
human history and
that are we can understand to be
partial approximations attempts to
understand something which are
partially adequate and radically
inadequate at the same time
you know so
when you move beyond individual
consciousness and move into the
collective psyche and begin to engage
some of the dynamics of the collective
psyche
part of what you engage are all the
stories that we've been telling
ourselves for tens of thousands of years
all the values that have been involved
in these stories which have been
reinforcing themselves on all these
cultural traditions
and there comes a point where
you die
out of the collective psyche just as
earlier you had died out of your
personal psyche and when you die out of
the collective psyche you move into a
states of awareness which are
trans species which are go far beyond
the entire human
history
and at that point you're moving into
states of awareness that are radically
radically
beyond and clearer
than any states of consciousness that
take place within the collective psyche
and you just you realize that all the
stories of our religions
are part of the collective psyche story
and that there are realities
are far far beyond any of those
realities and i think that buddhism is
pointing to that phenomena when it says
it's it's fundamentally agnostic it says
you shouldn't restrict yourself to any
limiting belief about god however you
can experience the reality that we're
pointing to
you know we can experience this reality
but our understanding of it will always
be partial and fragmented
oh my goodness so jeez every every one
of these little snippets we can run off
for a couple hours on this yeah there
are a couple things here that really
stood out for me chris
and again there's there's these are
really seed syllables for massive arenas
for conversation but one is is what you
talk about so beautifully in your book
and i have not read living classroom yet
but i i literally just got it in the
mail
and that is this radical revolutionary
new pedagogical approach which you talk
about and i love it this this transition
from kind of newtonian atomistic
pedagogy
individuality separate from others to a
kind of a quantum entangled pedagogy
where
using the mixing metaphor is the
connective tissue of consciousness that
you're really
you're learning by becoming i mean what
a fantastic thing to say which by the
way has resonance in both the hindu and
buddhist traditions through what my
languaging is the gnostic pedagogical
approach of hearing
contemplating
meditating which is ingest digest
metabolize until the teachings actually
are purified filtered from conceptual
defilements into full somatic embalment
embodiment and there that's where true
knowing comes from and so i love
that aspect of your journey that that it
introduces a type of pedagogy that is
completely resonant with the classic uh
wisdom traditions
you experience this through your journey
i also want to come back to and this is
key to me and this was a really really
big experience for me when i did my
three year retreat
where
i experienced what you're referring to
for the first time in my life and i
wrestled with it chris because it really
at that time it wasn't dissonance with
my unders
obviously a limited understanding of
emptiness and not non-theism where
i did feel
um i was being held and loved by
something bigger than me
and this really um created a rub for me
because it was like hey wait a second i
i thought there was no externality i
thought it was all
scallops you know it's not solid cystic
but it's just mind only so how
how can there be an external agency
without capitulating to the god
principle
and and so what i want to share with you
that again your book was such an
inspiration for me is that in a very
real way when i was doing these guru
yogas and devotional practices properly
my mind broke i died to a limited
self-sense
i had you know we can come back to this
in a little bit there's just tremendous
hardship and pain before that
breakthrough occurred
and then the minute that happened i felt
this complete container mandala holding
environment of love and dare i say and
this is in quotations an external agency
that was in fact holding me and then
what became unbelievably interesting to
me chris was
in a certain way in the third year of my
retreat i lost
something i lost some of these initial
qualities and so
at first it was like wait a second i i
where where did my magical nature of
mine go and
and i was i really entered kind of a
dark night of the soul within my
three-year retreat and a llama came in
and said something
that just floored me that um it was a
female llama that said
the dakinis can bestow awakening and
they can take it away and and i said
what
like that was like oh you know it was
like a big bong just in my head but it
was so true it felt like somehow it had
been taken away and it took me decades
chris to finally understand
the really brutal painful powerful
lesson
that was developing in my retreat and
you mentioned this a little bit in the
very last chapter of your book which i
thought was just absolutely genius
that i was getting stuck in a kind of
almost spiritual bypassing or
transcendentalism in the negative sense
that i was
dissolving into these completely
formless realms where i became the
universe and and i realized
on one level when this agency for lack
of a better term took it away
the
and this is my thought bubble probably
akin to some of the thought bubbles that
entered you
it was like the command was
you will find me in form or you will not
find me at all in other words it was
almost as if don't get stuck on this
formless stuff don't get stuck in the
transcendental aspect
come back to the earth come back to the
imminent come back into body
and that turned out to be one of the
most
radically challenging and
eventually over 20 years of trying to
incorporate that revelatory experiences
of the retreat
was that no it's not about this ascent
into this fundamental godhead that's
just half the journey the other half the
the involutionary half
is taking that and bringing it riveting
it um molding it back into the earth and
so um i want to pause just to share that
story with you because when you share
that in your book it was like oh my gosh
this is exactly
resonant with what happened in my own
experience so i want to return to you if
you don't mind help me further
understand and this will help many of my
listeners who are buddhists who
really work in the realm of non-theism
and emptiness the so-called agency the
beloved
that in fact can embrace that we can
call on that we can work with it that we
really are not alone
we can take refuge in these greater
forces to help us along our path so
sorry for the long-winded interjection
but i wanted to describe it because i
appreciate it very powerful my own
experience not just a theoretical thing
this was a big deal in my own practice
life yeah
you know
um
maybe it's a footnote to my earlier
comment to bridge into
this new wing i think sri aurobindo's
critique of buddhism is correct
in that he he criticizes
buddhism
for not sufficiently confronting the
fact of existence
the
the extraordinary power and majesty of
existence in
in rejecting
anything static and anything in form in
its agnosticism in its anti-theism and
it's i'm not taught teaching
all of that is well and good
but he says we have to come to terms
with the fact
of the magnitude and the genius and the
majesty of the universe of which we are
apart
now
buddhism may say
well thank you very much we don't need
that what we really need is freedom from
our suffering i'll take the freedom from
suffering and i'm not going to engage in
the metaphysical
quote speculation
and arbendo's response is it's not an
either or
and it's a certain kind of a
capitulation
to not confront some of the magnitude of
the breath of life
and i think that
now to move more towards what you were
describing
when we have these breakthroughs when we
do the work and we go through the
purification processes and and we face
our shortcomings and and we let go and
we let go and we immerse ourselves
deeper and deeper
and then when we have these melting
experiences where as you say we are
embraced we are held by orders of of of
genius and orders of love
beyond anything we had ever experienced
before
and one can go deeper into that there's
there's i've learned that there's so
many
levels of oneness and there's even
levels of
of the void of the fertile void though
that seems like a contradiction there
are levels of that and you can go deeper
and deeper into that
and
it feels initially like
an external or an other
because it wasn't there before or we
didn't experience it before but we do
now and it's it clearly is not inside of
us it feels outside of us because it's
holding us but the more
sorry i'm having something peeping off
back here that's okay it's all good
the more you go back and forth into that
condition and back out again and into it
and press it of course the more you
realize that you're just waking up to
your own nature you're weak because your
nature and this universal nature is the
same nature
that our essential nature is this vast
expanse
this
love that floods us from outside is
actually
a love which is welling up also from
with inside
the challenges is stabilizing those
insights and and bringing them into our
daily experience now i think this is a
this is a challenge of all spiritual
practice of course we go on these long
retreats we get into subtle subtle
territories we come back to the honking
horns
and it's just
it's so difficult to hold on and to
integrate day-to-day and this is
particularly the case i think in
psychedelic practice whether you're
using psychedelics
as a spiritual practice or whether
you're using psychedelics as i did
as a measure aiming at
cosmological exploration
because
in my experience in what i did i think i
pushed myself
far far deeper into
the consciousness of the universe than i
could ever ever internalize and
stabilize in this lifetime
and
i came to realize during my time after
that i came off the mountain after i
stopped my work when i was beginning to
kind of just come off the mountain come
away from that long period of practice
that i had
i had
created an imbalance an unwitting
imbalance i thought that because i had
integrated each session thoroughly and
carefully and conscientiously that i
could step back from my sessions and i
could take all these blessings with me
and i learned that
uh
i had basically leaned so heavily into
transcendence that i had sort of lost my
foothold in imminence
and i knew from my experiences that the
entire universe was the body of divine
are the body of this infinite
consciousness i knew that i was never
outside
of
divine reality
inside physical reality but i could not
hold that awareness yet inside physical
reality i know that there are beings who
do
the great beings are always one's guides
in these things
but i had and
it's kind of like you i think what
what i i was kind of kicked off of the
path kicked off of the mountain by the
sessions themselves i did not know i was
ending them they were being ended but
there came i had these last sessions
which basically
let me know that it was time to end
and one of the things i learned in the
process of ending is that
i had to
not expand my consciousness i had to not
alter my consciousness in any way if the
states of being that i had experienced
in my sessions were ever going to come
and awaken fully inside my historical
existence
so i had to
sit with the shell of my historical
existence
if i was ever going to fully integrate
these vast
bliss domains
of ecstatic
presence
and i think i i think i did go farther
than was
good for me and i i have been
in a completely different but equally
important process since i stopped my
sessions the way the sessions put it or
the way my meditation put it is
there is the uh
the dying of uh discovering
and then the dying of keeping
and i had done the dying of discovery
but now i had to do the dying of keeping
and that's a different process
yeah
wow i mean you're stopping my mind with
every one of these
so many things here but a couple things
so much about this is
mind-bending it it's really
mental yoga
stretching
almost to the breaking point and so a
couple questions here is and i wrestle
with this i mean
the integrity of your being chris your
presence
the clarity of your writing the elegance
of your scholasticism your academic
predispositions and the like i have to
say
have been incredibly important for me to
substantiate the veracity of your
journey
and i see it with the mobility of simply
the way you're presenting yourself it's
like this is the real deal but it is
such a mind stretch and so a couple of
things along this beautiful challenge of
stretching into the notion of i love
your nomenclature here psychedelic
practice i've never heard that before so
talk to us a little bit about this
revolutionary notion greed you know the
skids have been greased by michael
pollan
james kingsland
stan groth these amazing predecessors
the shoulders upon which you now stand
where you can now um silently but
radically proclaim the validity
of entheogen psychedelics as path
so yeah talk a little bit more about the
practice of psychedelics um how to work
this is as a path and then to come back
to before i forget
parenthetically
the the importance of integration and
the danger of disintegration in other
words were you ever afraid of going
insane
that you were stretched beyond your
capacities to contain and instead of
stretching you
snap so again there's two big noodles
thrown there the first noodles yeah the
first and i think in many ways probably
the most important is talk to us about
psychedelics as practice and path
and then to come back maybe a little bit
about the process of integration versus
disintegration sanity versus insanity
yeah
well you know in different interviews
that i've done i make the point that
i've never tripped people say you've
done 73 trips i said no i've never
tripped
uh i've done sessions these are
therapeutically focused sessions but
actually i i'm in my own mind i think of
the japanese term
sashim
the sashin is a meditation retreat it's
a period of time set aside for spiritual
intense spiritual practice
so
when i just talk about lsd sessions i
could be talking about lsd sashim
it is a period of time set aside
for
uh
therapeutic work
for spiritual work for cosmological work
uh and there are certain just as in a
sashim
your daily life changes you change your
schedule you change your eating you
change your sleeping patterns you change
your rhythm in order to focus and
intensify this practice just as you did
when you did your three-year retreat
everything changes around this long
period of sustained introspection
the same is true in the psychedelic
process the the critical
the underbelly
of using psychedelics
as part of a practice of transformation
an organized practice of of
transformation
the underbelly is that it's temporary
you only have these states for a few
hours at a time
and even if you use them diligently
you still only have them for a few hours
of a time at a time which is really the
major reason why i stopped it it became
too painful for me
to keep coming back
from these states
until eventually i made a deal
with my beloved my name for this
intelligence whatever it is
that it would not bring me back into
these dimensions again until i could
stay
it became it was just too painful to
come and go
um but
before you get to that point
you can do a lot of cleaning you can you
do a lot of healing and you would you
can do a lot of good for other people
in that
what happened in my work after about two
and a half years when i went through
this what stan calls the perinatal
process and all you go through this
reliving with your birth confronting all
the fears of death confronting the
fundamental existential crisis of
whether there is any meaning in
existence eventually going to a complete
shattering of your individual egoic
reality
i thought oh that's great i've gone
through an ego death it was a shattering
experience things are going to open up
now i'm going to go into clean sailing
not what happened
what happens that everything cranked up
all over again
the suffering got worse and it expanded
for two years of practice into larger
and larger levels thousands hundreds of
thousands of people
thousands and thousands of years i had
entered the hill realms
and i and at first i thought this is
like a deeper level of ego death
but eventually i came to understand that
no this was not about me at all this was
not about fundamentally my personal
transformation or my personal awakening
or even my personal healing this was
about trying to heal some aspect of the
collective psyche that there is an
organizational structure a consciousness
that that is our species consciousness
and all the wounds of history that are
left unresolved are not only left
unresolved at an individual soul level
but they are left unresolved at the
species level so all the wars we've
fought all the terrible things we've
done to each other all the trauma to the
extent that that trauma is not healed it
it resides as unfinished business within
the collective psyche and
every spiritual practitioner who goes
deeply enough in whatever methodology
they're using
is given often an invitation if they
choose to exercise it
to
lift some of that suffering not out of
their personal life but to lift some of
that suffering out of the collective
psyche and for reasons that i think are
sole choice
that became
a large part of my
work and i think there's nothing really
special here i mean this is what
any mother who sees a child suffering is
going to do if she can do something to
try to help that child's suffering to
alleviate it any father worth assault is
going to try to help a suffering child
if we are given the opportunity we're
going to try to help other people who
are in pain
this is just the normal workings of life
so
to me
in fact it became a mystery to me
why the collective suffering stopped
why i wasn't allowed to stay in there
anymore when clearly there's continuing
collective suffering in the human psyche
why was i taken into deeper levels
beyond that
levels which were very difficult very
challenging
but they were not involved with
collective pain
uh i'm losing the the second part of
your question that you would ask yeah no
happy happy to throw it back up because
there's again there's so much richness
coming out
um that's returning to to this notion of
uh
we've circumambulated this but haven't
really directed uh
talked about
the place of fear
and role of integration versus
disintegration did you ever actually
fear
um especially coming back to the
so-called real world for your sanity i
mean did you ever feel you're going to
become so unhinged because let me just
say this very briefly chris one of the
things that was profoundly resonant with
with your work and this is what just
blew me away this kind of
on one level i've come to see
psychedelics is a type of tantra and by
this what i mean is and this has been a
radical change in my more conservative
nature being more traditionalist and
paying homage again there's tremendous
genius to the power of tradition but
there are also some near enemies
ossification um
refining even the tradition itself
losing tributaries of new information
and growth
yeah and so i used to be really somewhat
disdainful of of these um
uh
kind of psychedelic approaches is
chemical mysticism in the pejorative
sense these kind of cheap fixes but i've
really changed my tune and that i now
see them as a type of tantra
by that what i mean is that in tantra
body is as important as mind and now
we're talking about body
very subtle body we're talking about
chemical body we're talking about body
at the level of
of neurochemistry basically and so i
think again within the context of
psychedelics as practice and path
it actually can fit in an expanded
rubric of tantra where body in this case
chemistry
is as important as the mind that is
evoked in this kind of neuropharma um
from
neurophenomenological way to use the
neural end to bring about these
phenomenal states yeah and so with that
in mind yeah the question was the role
of
fear here and integration versus
disintegration and
how that relates to your ability to
contain this information
you uh
i had i did come into places
to go through a death rebirth cycle
is always an ordeal at one level or
another it always involves a surrender
to the unknown it always involves
yielding to a certain fear that's
holding your system locked in place
and there were places
where at advanced stages of the game
that i truly did fear for my sanity or
at least i knew that i was going
someplace that was completely beyond
anything which i could hold on to
i could not hold on to sanity as i had
known it
and it was like going over a waterfall
and you just
but once you go through that once you go
over that waterfall
and you experience that death
and you experience waking up
in a new reality as a new being a new
kind of being not only a new and
improved you but a different kind of
being where for hours at a time you can
experience
the universe as it experiences itself
completely beyond any human right frame
of reference
once you experience it that is the
nature of the cycle and this is one of
the the great gifts that i got from stan
groth was the absolute conviction that
if you let these experiences take you
wherever they want to take you
even though you don't understand them
even though you don't understand why
it's happening this way and it's
extremely painful
if you surrender completely it will
always take you through a crisis and
it'll catch you on the other side and it
will receive you
and there there is a blessing waiting
for you on that other side
and for me coming back from a session
it's nev i've i have no trauma from any
of my psychedelic history i can listen
to the music i used and even the most
horrifying aspects of the journey and i
love it i'm completely comfortable with
it
i can talk about any of the difficult
portions without any resonating any
trauma because
when you take it all the way through you
complete the cycle things get bad they
get worse they get worse they get very
very bad
but if you let surrender it'll take you
through to a completion into ecstasy and
then what you bring back is this entire
cycle you bring back the knowledge that
things get bad but then things get great
and
that's the rhythm of death and rebirth
that is the spiral of death and rebirth
now
that doesn't mean and i thought as long
as that was going on
i was peaches that you know that if i
was holding everything in balance what i
did find however is
that other thing we talked about you can
go so far into the ecstasy you can go so
deep into transcendence
that literally learning how to live with
your memories
becomes a major challenge
so
as a spiritual practice
this practice is different from
classical
spiritual practices which are much more
emphasizing kind of
holding on to everything relatively
speaking holding on to where you go
in smaller increments
i have an i have an understanding of how
the universe works but i don't live
within that reality on a 24 7 basis
the great beings live within that
reality on a 24 7 basis so being able to
i'm speaking out of my memory
and it's good to have
memories of these realities i mean i
really think that changed my life
but it's one thing to be speaking out of
memory it's another thing to be speaking
out of an immediate present right here
living experience of this reality yeah
and learning
you can internalize so many profound
memories
that it literally becomes challenging
to live with those memories
they haunt you for the rest of your life
and they haunt you in a good way they're
not they don't haunt you in any negative
way you literally are haunted by the
beauty
of the universe
all right and so you just
you try to live it an embodiment as best
as you can
um
yeah do you think do you think chris one
of the things that really struck me was
what you just paraphrased
and i have to say in this part of the
book i i struggled with this part of
this part of the book when you were
talking about
just all the pain all the hardship all
the dot the death the the unbelievably
wrenching section about the the
dying children was
it was almost too much and so
yeah i i hung in there and i'm glad i
did in a certain way
almost metaphoric if you're hanging in
there but
is it possible that that perhaps the
what was being invited was developing a
one taste relationship
to both the heaven and the hell
that there would in fact be no
preference and no because that's what
they say allegedly
the very highest stages before the 11th
boomi the highest
um
kind of membrane barrier before
awakening is no preference whatsoever
for samsara nor nirvana discovering the
inseparability so do you think on one
level that the agency was somehow
eliciting the teaching lesson
of great equanimity that in fact relate
to the agony in the same way you relate
to the ecstasy to realize that there's
fundamentally no preference for either
that that that
may have been what was being suggested
there does that resonate with you
i understand the teaching
and that teaching does
come up and reflect certain aspects
of the journey
i'm not sure that it reflects this
particular aspect uh in a in a
satisfying way i have a different way of
understanding because
you're talking here about the ocean of
what i call the ocean of suffering
and um
you know one of the things i describe in
the book is
insights that came much later in the
session that
i don't think everybody has to go into
something like the ocean of suffering i
don't think everybody has to go into the
hill realms or spend as long in the hell
realms as i spent there i mean i don't
think
people need to be afraid
of going through what i went through
as kind of a
necessary part of
any kind of spiritual journey or
cosmological exploration
i think
that this was something that my chose my
soul chose to do
before i was born
it it manifested so quickly in my
sessions after a couple of years and it
was such a
tenacious and sustained part of my
journey that i came to understand that
this was literally
a soul's choice and and i i say this
without pride at all because i think
there are many many many beings in the
world today
who have made the same choice i think we
are living in a critical time in history
we are living in a time when the sins of
the fathers literally are just pouring
out of us
and i i don't i quote the biblical
passage not to put this all on men but
that really the limitations of our
up to now standard of our evolutionary
standard
are just pouring out of us because we
are being challenged to move into our
next evolutionary step not only as
individuals but as the species
that the creative intelligence of the
universe is trying to awaken not only
individual spiritual practitioners but
the game is collective now it's
desperately trying to awaken the entire
human species
and the
the hill realms that one are literally
manifesting on earth as part of this
collective detoxification process and i
think there are many beings who are have
taken the bodhisattva vow into their
life
and are working to alleviate suffering
collectively socially politically
and also cycle spiritually
because i think this century is
different than earlier centuries
because there's a boiling taking place
there's a there's a there's a churning
which is taking place deep within
and so i assumed that i knew what i was
getting into and i volunteered for this
work and i know that
it's a hard chapter to read even though
i cut it down to the minimal form it's
difficult material
uh and yet i've had so many people write
me and say i know exactly what you're
talking about because
i've been i've been going through these
experiences for years or i went through
them and i didn't understand them you've
helped me understand them some well but
i think it's it's not an unusual
experience
um
once we understand
that what's taking place here
is a collective dynamic it's something
that we as an individual may have
started
but the universe uses our individual
initiative to accomplish something of
its purpose of its agenda and its agenda
is to heal the human species in order to
clear out
the dross that is holding us back
to make more room for the infusion
of grace our energy our awareness that
is coming
to carry humanity through this crisis
that we are coming into we literally
cannot afford to be a planet that's run
by egos anymore yeah for sure we're just
killing the planet we need to be a
planet that's r run by awakened souls
and by that i mean
beings who have a a conscious awareness
of their history
so that they know that they are not
simply egos separate private cells that
they have a an awakened soul
consciousness
where they know themselves to be
spiritual beings in dynamic relationship
with other spiritual beings including
non-human
beings in this world
you know animal kingdom
and when we wake up in that way and we
discover how old we are and how many
generations we've been doing this and we
discover the breadth of our human of our
relationships with other beings
then naturally
we make different choices
as we make more inclusive choices we
make choices for the long term
we make choices on that serves the good
of all and right now i think we
desperately
need to be making choices that are
inclusive and work for the good of all
yeah that's really beautiful
with your permission and if you don't
want to go here that's fine
i want to turn
again
i have to contain both my enthusiasm and
the energy of like oh my gosh
we need to talk about that we need to
talk about that
so i'm letting so much slide that
it it's fantastic but
with your kind permission um i want to
turn to the this issue of
the the scientific and academic elephant
in the room
how do we know if anything any of this
is actually true how do we know um
issues of rapid
replicability i mean how do we know if
if what you're seeing is idiosyncratic
to your own biochemistry that this and
again in the best sense of the word not
pejorative this is your trip yeah and
and how how do we know that if if a
thousand other people did exactly what
you did
that they could even come close to
replicating your insights or would they
in fact have their own particular
biological historical phenomenological
whatever matrix whereby they would see
and write um
a different journey a different book
through 20 years of exploration so
the issue here is the problem of proof
and universality what would happen
if a thousand people did exactly what
you did and they came up with a thousand
different visions i mean how certain are
you that what you're experiencing is
actually true
yeah or simply your enculturation
your your own
unique biochemistry and all the
histories that bring about the narrative
that you're sharing with us so
are you okay going in this direction
absolutely that's a really important
question i mean that's like a
foundational question because if
if this is only
echoes from my own personal psyche or
even echoes from the collective psyche
then it has a certain kind of epistemic
value but it doesn't really have
sufficient epistemic value that we that
warrants our attention
and i i discussed this
all the way back in uh dark night early
dawn in the first chapter where i'm
outlining what it me this
phil psychedelic philosophy
and there's a section there called the
epistemic warrant of psychedelic
experience where i
flesh out this question and look at what
the issues are involved in this in
questioning whether these experiences
truly do have epistemic value so that's
i just point there also ken ring and i
have had a dialogue about this
uh ken his good friend wonderful
researcher near-death episode i've used
his books for years in my classes
he
challenged me on the same questions and
we did a dialogue eventually we
published it in uh
i'm blanking on where it is it should i
should have this at the tip of my tongue
yeah it's online uh it's quite the essay
is
our deep psychedelic experience is
trustable yeah
and um
if it were just my experiences
that would be one thing but here's i
think the great value of stan groff's
work
where stan groff has collected
psychedelic experiences from hundreds if
not thousands of people over decades and
he's integrated them into a certain
model
of what happens at different stages of
the journey
my experiences fit squarely within the
broader phenomenological
discussion of experiences that he has
already outlined and so i think that he
provides in a sense a broad epistemic
warrant
for look taking seriously my maybe a
little unusually intense or maybe a
little unusually deep my experiences but
there's not too much new here
when you look at the full breadth of
experiences that he's reported in his
many many books culminating in his great
masterwork of the way of the psychonaut
so there's a deep you know overlap there
another point i think
i'm thinking of michael saban
who was a
cardiologist in the early days of the
near-death episode movement and he was
very upset that people were talking
about coming back from a cardiac arrest
and talking about spiritual realities he
didn't believe in any of that stuff and
he was going to systematically disprove
it
and uh he eventually wrote a book in
which he came to the conclusion this
stuff is real
and you differentiate
between what he calls the local event
and the transcendent event that when
somebody has is in surgery or has a
cardiac arrest they get out of they have
a sensation of getting out of their body
and they can experience what's going on
in the local arena the surgical theater
the waiting room down the hall the
hospital what's going on in the parking
lot outside
and then they go into the light and they
they leave physical reality and they go
into a transcendental reality
he says we can't evaluate the
transcendent
experience that they have but we can
evaluate the accuracy of their local
experience and that's what he tries to
do
whether what they think they experience
locally is in fact verified verifiable
in that world and he he provided
evidence that in fact it was now that
doesn't prove that the transcendent
experience is true but it certainly
increases the credibility that if it's
the local experience is true the
transcendent experiences gets a little
bit more little boost of credibility
the same thing happens in psychedelic
experiences many psychedelic experiences
are such that they can be verified
information about the conditions of
birth or circumstances of birth the
things that people learn that they
really we can reasonably exclude the
possibility that they had learned
through natural means and yet it turns
out that these things can be
validated
that plays here
the other part though is i think um
cross-validation other people having
similar experience communal confirmation
exactly
now
what we find is this when people start
working with psychedelics
if you took a hundred people from a
hundred different backgrounds different
socio-cultural backgrounds different
trainings and whatnot they would have
very different experiences
because
psychedelics or lsd is an amplifier
it doesn't take you to a particular
experience it amplifies your mind and
because we have different histories we
come in contact with different
experiences however
stan reports that when people go through
the perinatal death rebirth process
our experiences get very very
concentrated and very standardized we
begin to deal with issues which are not
idiosyncratic but are universal
fundamental existential issues and that
when people navigate the death rebirth
experience
every person that he is experienced who
goes through that process
comes back with a an understanding of
spiritual reality which is fundamentally
compatible with each other that there is
a spiritual world that was waiting for
us and receives us from then it's a
matter of
evaluating
our individual explorations of that
spiritual world
now
what i did in uh
my first in my first book on
psychedelics near
darknet early dawn i put together three
areas of inquiry psychedelic research
near-death episode research
and out-of-body research particularly
the work of robert monroe founder of the
monroe institute of applied science
author of three books exploring the
out-of-body state and i asked whether
these cosmologies that emerged from
these separate bodies of exploration
autobody research
near-death episode research psychedelic
research are there cosmological visions
diverging
or are they converging
and
once you look at them carefully they are
converging they are clearly converging
so that's addressing the question are
are these experiences trustworthy
now in my dialogue with ken ring i
present other reasons why i think
they're trustworthy and that is
for every time i had my own cultural
expectations fulfilled because i'm
educated in world religions i'm educated
in comparative spirituality i have an
understanding of certain of these things
but for every time i've had them
confirmed i've also had
more
experiences that
that
shatter my expectations i learned things
i was not expecting i i learned an
understanding of reincarnation how
reincarnation works and where it's
taking us that i was not expecting at
all i wasn't expecting anything about
the birth of the future human there was
nothing about my conditioning which led
me to think that humanity was coming
into this crossroads there were so many
things that i was shown so consistently
that were far and beyond anything that i
had personally expected that i think one
can reasonably conclude
that this is a confrontation with truly
an
independent reality and i mean
independent i have to qualify that but a
reality that it was not simply echoing
back to me my own expectations
and if you study the work of other
people who push deeply into these
conditions into these states i think we
find a fundamental convergence which
doesn't mean we're seeing the exact same
thing
but the issue is do our do our visions
overlap are they coherent with each
other do they overlap
now clearly we're only at the very early
stages of this inquiry
what's important is not any one person's
experience
what's important is when we get
if we were to be able to get a
standardized protocol take 100 people a
thousand people with some type of
standardized protocol with very very
different backgrounds and put them
through the same
regimen
of
internal introspective work
then we get all of their testimony all
of their experiences put them all on the
table and begin to look at what is it
that's consistent and what is
idiosyncratic
that's where
where we're going we're just are not
there yet we're only at the very early
stages so i have no doubt that some of
the things may be somewhat idiosyncratic
to me but i think that when we get to
that point where we have hundreds of
people putting their testimony forward
we're going to find much more
consistency and overlap than we find
divergence
oh my goodness so so so many things here
as well what a beautiful mr crystal
really the difference between
correspondence epistemology and
coherence epistemology i mean the truth
is born of coherence is the type of
knowing that you're alluding to here
but this begs the question of
um
aspirations around this and so pardon
the tongue-in-cheek reference here but i
was this came to me out of who knows
where
where you you know where do you see
yourself in 20 years do you see yourself
and again if you don't want to go here
fine but um
how do you see yourself
are you a shaman for our age um do you
see yourself
uh and this is where the the play on
word comes in not not establishing a uh
the church of lds but the church of lsd
right so do you see yourself
not the latter day saints but you know
lsd so do you see yourself
do you see yourself um and i think you
understand the heart of my question
founding a church
where in fact
you know you you have a place where you
can you now can create as a visionary
as a revolutionary
a holding environment a mandala
container
that can allow future psychonauts
to actually embrace this as path because
otherwise
where is this going to go
are you
just a unique and really interesting
blip
or is are you portending the possibility
of really creating a tradition of
psychonauts
using rigorous to whatever extent they
can methodologies
frameworks um
i think you see where i'm coming from
here you know what what's next in terms
of people say somebody comes to you and
says chris i'm so blown away by your
book
i want to take psychedelics as a
practice i want to create this as a path
what do i do where do i go
well the first thing i tell that person
always is please don't do what i did um
do it gently be gentler be
more careful
uh i think i'm a symptom of a cultural
pivot that we're making i don't think
i'm important and
as we make this cultural pivot
i think i will just sort of disappear
under the wave of history
as a somewhat early
explorer
but i think we are making a pivot that's
going to include and is embracing
uh the value of psychedelics now right
now
you know we basically did about 25 years
of this work and then in 1970
6970 it was all made illegal
then we went into this long drive period
until 2014 when scientific american
published an editorial basically on the
front page
of the saying that it's time to let
scientists determine not politicians
determine whether psychedelics have
therapeutic value so right now this is
tremendous renaissance taking place
universities all over the world are
studying psychedelics they're
establishing centers for studying
psychedelics a tremendous explosion
we're starting where we started
back in the 1950s
exploring these potentials for healing
the personal psyche we're looking at
post-traumatic stress healing addiction
healing death anxiety
healing depression we really focus on
using these substances in therapeutic
applications and under controlled
scientific conditions
and this is
and that's perfectly where we ought to
be we need to
now that we've started this inquiry
again we need to be very rigorous
establish the protocols do the
documentation look at the brainwave
pictures so on and so forth
sooner or later however we're going to
discover the same thing we discovered
far back and i'm not talking about the
the popular 60s psychedelic movement
though that too but the serious
researchers the stan groff and that
early generations ralph messner
that generation of researchers
discovered
that
these substances
have philosophical value not just
psychotherapeutic value they give us
anti insights into the structure of the
deep psyche they can even give us
insights into the structure of the
cosmos into the structural the cosmology
of the mind and if we take
phds who have people who have phds in
physics and astronomers they can
literally come back with deeper insights
into the realities that they are that
they're
educated to understand i often have
wished that i had phds in astronomy and
physics because then i would be able to
understand so much more than i was able
to understand give in the background
that i had in humanities
we're making this pivot
i think that just as psychotherapists
are creating all sorts of creative
protocols
for exploiting the therapeutic potential
of these substances it's only going to
be a matter of time before we develop
philosophical protocols
which for systematically exploring these
states of consciousness going into them
in a rigorous manner coming back
recording them evaluating them
looking at our experiences in the in a
social context for social validation or
asking that question embodying putting
our experiences in the context of other
bodies of knowledge looking at how these
experiences correlate to quantum physics
for example or correlate to super string
theory
i think this is this is not me
i'm i'm going to be gone 20 years hell i
won't be around in 20 years i don't
think i'll be around nearly that long
i'll be gone and actually in two
i i should say
it took me a long time to even be
willing to share these experiences
because i know how
upsetting or controversial they are
i i literally thought
of
writing the book and letting it be
published posthumously yeah exactly
because i didn't want to deal with the
fall out of it and i sort of
haven't
with wolfgang paulie in his conversation
with carl jung right he didn't want any
of that revealed until after he died but
anyway i'm sorry i didn't mean to cut
yeah and i just i thought
but you know the mother told me said no
you can't do that she said uh
she said this is
we need all oars in the water
uh she said you didn't give yourself
these visions
we gave you those visions and they were
never given to you for your private
edification you were holding these
visions and trust and that she wanted me
to share them
not because it's not important that
they're my visions
she wanted me to share them because
they would support other people in their
spiritual practice other people in their
social work
to help us through this very very
intense time of history that we're
coming into all hands on deck
and so
i did the book and i don't have any i
don't have any agenda
i think what's
what's clear is that there is a social
pivot taking place
and that's what's important as we move
forward collectively the
work which is being done in graduate
programs in medical schools all over the
country that's what's important i think
i'm a little bit ahead of the curve in
terms of the philosophical discovery
only because of the very very intense
methodology that i used but i don't
think i'm really
that far ahead of the curve
uh
the there is a a professor from southern
methodist university called bill barnard
who's written two fantastic books one on
william james and one on henri berkson a
fine academic bill barnard
and he's publishing a book from columbia
university press this year called liquid
light
which basically is a philosopher's
reflections on his extended experiences
with ayahuasca and living with the sante
dame community in brazil
beautiful book magnificent book and
symptomatic one more academic
who's willing to go public on their
psychedelic experiences and not simply
recording them and saying oh this is you
know what's important but evaluating
them critically digesting them and
offering them as part of an ongoing
historical discussion so we're making
this pivot it's it's happening and it's
it's radically brave chris i want to
acknowledge your bravery on this and
again this is a stretch
for for me because
i'm being
introduced over the last couple years to
how conservative i am on some levels i
always thought myself as this liberal
far out kind of guy but i realized in my
own way i had my i wouldn't say blind
spots but natures of of being
conservative that that really now being
challenged stretched open and going wow
this is fantastic and one of these is
the the just the
generous courage of writing a book like
this because
you know this from the traditional
admonitions
he who knows
does not speak he who speaks does not
know and so here you are you're speaking
all over the place and i i used to
really
um question that and then
you know the the beautiful book by media
rinpoche if you haven't read it in love
with the world amongst journey through
the barna's life and death yeah it's an
amazing journey of his intimate sharing
that is profoundly inspiring
your book
vi in certain sense violates the code of
secrecy but i think we're living in in
unusual times that require unusual slash
extreme measures and so
i for one really applaud your courage
that you are you are stretching the
boundaries in so many levels in terms of
pedagogy
radical innovations and path and also
courage and sharing and so
you're about to say something i want to
return to what you're about to say but i
i i really deeply thank you for that
because
you know the tradition took uh
said
sharing experiences inappropriately and
that's the key
is like being in a dark cave with a
candle and giving your candle away
you're left in the dark
opportunity is transformed into obstacle
and so i i this is both an applause for
what you're doing and perhaps a
commentary elicited from you
in terms of inviting
more and more of the sharing so that
people can realize there is a course of
sanity coming out you know radical
innovative ways of learning so yeah i
had to really face resistance around
that too because in buddhism
traditionally you don't talk about your
experiences
you know you really don't talk about it
it can become an encumbrance on you to
talk about your experiences
and um
but you know
i'm a teacher i love to teach i was
designed to teach i'm a yakker
i i i love to learn yeah
you know i just that's what i love to do
and as i said at the in that coming off
the mountain chapter it wasn't simply
the imbalance of toward transcendence
which made me sick coming off the
mountain it was the silence that i had
to live with because as a philosopher of
religion i had had the most powerful
philosophical experiences of my life and
i wasn't allowed to talk about them i
wasn't allowed to share with them i
wasn't allowed to do my job
which and to do my job as an academic
because of our
phobia our laws around psychedelics
and that holding that information
literally makes you sick inside it you
know i wasn't allowed to be who i truly
am
and writing the book was part of my own
self-healing
and beginning to speak about it as part
of my own self-healing and at the same
time having said that
i have no agenda whatsoever i
i'm not i have no pr i'm not trying to
persuade anybody i i don't have an axe
to grind i've got nothing to sell i'm
i'm an old man
you know i'm 72 years old
the end of the diving board is getting
close thank goodness
this being that i am is so ephemeral is
so short-lived
i have i have no attachment to it and
certainly no attachment of using it as a
model of anything but i love to teach
and i hope that the experiences will be
useful to other people even if they
never take any psychedelics whatsoever
i hope that the vision of the universe
and the the vision of the intelligence
of the universe will resonate deeply
with the people's inner experiences
and their cognitive experiences as
science becomes
more aggressive in pushing its own
boundaries
but i hope it will speak to people
whether or not they ever take any
psychedelics
um
because i think we are at a pivot point
we are just
we're coming out of this terrible period
of history where we believe that there's
no intelligence to the universe it's all
an accident that it's all a mechanistic
rule of the genetic dice and there's no
real intelligence to the existential
circumstances that we confront and i
think this is being exploded and we're
waking up and suddenly where it's like a
veil is being lifted we're waking up to
a world in which reincarnation is a
fundamental fact of life it's a fact of
nature we're waking up to
uh
two truly an emergent intelligence in
the universe which everywhere we look
whether it's in the solar system in
galaxies in the genetic code
everywhere we look we are seeing orders
and orders and orders of intelligence
and this is simply accelerating that
immersion into that intelligence uh and
that opens up a whole new
i think this is a pivot point that we're
coming into and you know it couldn't
happen a minute too soon
because we are about to go extinct if we
don't change
it's it really reminds me uh chris of
what the the ecology scientists talk
about is punctuated equilibrium you know
being similar similar similar similar
similar
and then they sudden flip yeah so in a
certain way it's like what you said so
beautifully in the book that gestation
takes a long time birth happens quickly
and so when i look at the 50 000 foot
view what i'm seeing here is exactly
what you're intimating that
that correlative like the taoists say
correlated with the dark is the
emergence of light and in direct
proportion to the insanity are voices of
sanity coming in and so if we can relate
it's like they say in tantra
hell is paradise that the greater the
obstacle the greater the opportunity
in voices like yours and others that are
actually coming up in this ocean of
tremendous dark age talk about the kali
yuga yeah we
lend credibility to this co-emergent
principle that
if we simply look properly
voices like yours and and others we're
you're just part of a chorus of sanity
coming up just of course and if we see
that then we then we can it's all about
right view isn't it like the buddhists
say that if we simply have the right
view
that the greater
the obstacle degree the opportunity
then what you're talking about is adding
to that kind of view and so i i don't
want to draw too much of your time my
friend i could talk to you for the rest
of this day but
with your permission there's just a few
more things that oh my gosh i have to
ask you sure one is
and this is a little bit
i mean it's philosophical but it's
interesting for most people
and i think this is for you as well when
when we say oh that's just theoretical
that's philosophical well maybe so
simply because it's not your experience
yet
but when it becomes your experience it's
no longer theory it's no longer
philosophy it's your reality and so
one of the things that you talk about
that
that again
challenges
both hindu and buddhist
approaches to teleology
purpose on one level as you know the
tibetans talk about lila the world is
just play
um the tibetans talk about rolpa just
this divine play and dance
without directionality without purpose
and so is it simply a matter of stepping
out of binary
modes of thinking that is either that or
the other and switching to more
what they call a dialethism this this
the ability to hold um
different views concurrently i think
jung talked about this as well
so
talk to us a little bit about
um the emerging human which implies
purpose
teleology ends the omega point i mean
does that fit into your both your
experience and your understanding of
what you went through
you know i i think
when uh
some the great masters talk about life
is leela life is play creation is leela
it's a dance
i don't think they're saying of course
in any frivolous way
but i think what they're saying is
not necessarily that life doesn't have
an intelligence that is expressing
itself in purposeful activity but
they're saying that life isn't generated
out of compulsion
life is not generated out of necessity
that life comes out of the fullness of
being it comes out of the excess of
being it doesn't come out of a deficit
of being
and that there's an exuberant quality to
life and we express this exuberant
quality in this metaphor of a dance
because dance is not compelled we dance
out of joy we dance out of an excess we
don't dance out of necessity
i think the i think
when i
you know the theme
of the future human the emergence of the
future human was a completely unexpected
uh theme in my work
and it was one of the most consistent
themes of the work and it became the
context within which everything else
took place and it eventually became the
context in which i understood my entire
incarnation to be taking place it
started in the 23rd session and it the
last time i encountered it was in the
70th session it was a consistent thing
and it is
and here i would just suspend any
theistic notions of mechanistic
intention or purposeful intent or
manipulative intent
i i don't think in those categories uh i
i would hold on to an emergent
understanding of a cosmology that there
is an innate quality which is emerging
we go through these punctuated
equilibriums these these crisis points
and that there is a a genius at work
in this which i don't begin to
understand
the you know how this works
what i will report is that in my
sessions when i dissolved into
this larger intelligence which
existentially i was part of but
cosmologically was much larger than
anything i could
relate to personally
it was it told me a story over and over
again and it laid it out systematically
layer by layer without contradiction
over years
that humanity was coming to a turning
point humanity was approaching a
critical time in its evolutionary
journey a true before and after time
that there that the the the karma of of
millennia was kind of rushing into this
valley it's like multiple rivers pouring
into a canyon there's nowhere for us to
go except up
this is a critical time and that
and it is a time in some way foreseen by
the great seers of history by the great
saints by the great spiritual geniuses
of of history the by the great
incarnations the great prophets uh the
great awakened ones that they that they
have seen this kind of coming forward
it's a vision which is shared by
indigenous peoples that we are coming
into this time
and then
55 sessions
15 years or so into the work
now i have to back a bit
time became very porous to me in my work
i mean i was taken beyond linear time
multiple times in many different
modalities into what i call deep time
deep time is not eternity it's not it's
not timelessness it's experiencing
different spans of time from within a
different frame of reference
and i was taken into
deep time and i was taken into it not as
chris beige
because chris bash had been dissolved
long before
and i had been dissolved into
the
human unconscious into the human species
mind
and i don't know whether it was because
of the work that i had given in the
ocean of suffering whatever it was
i was taken into the future and
experienced
what i saw what i experienced as the
death and rebirth of humanity
as the human species
a cataclysmic period of history
in which humanity was literally just
broken down
we lost control
we were we were put through a crushing
historical process
where
all the
all the assumptions of the past broke
down
we were literally brought to our knees
we were reduced in the end
to the challenge of mere survival
it's just we were stripped down
it was a terribly excruciating
experience
but when it was at its worst when it was
at its peak
it was like a hurricane that passes over
a pacific island
suddenly i began to experience it
things were beginning to get better
things were beginning we there were many
many people that died but many survived
and the storm began to pass we began to
pick ourselves up we began to reconnect
and as we did
when we did we discovered that we had
been changed this crisis had changed us
at our core we began to enact
a
a living intelligence an aliveness that
we had discovered
in the worst of this crisis it was like
this crisis opened up our hearts
and
made us a more compassionate species
and it opened up our mind making us a
more intelligent species able to
integrate and access
information from the intelligence of the
universe itself
as we began to
reconnect with each other we began there
was a snowballing effect so that just as
there had been a breaking down and
breaking down and breaking down there
was an acceleration of creativity an
acceleration of the actualization of
values that we had discovered
in the worst of this crisis
where everything felt new everything
there was a new set of values a new set
of ideas a new political reality emerged
a new social reality emerged
later i was given
more instructions
on
the mech some of the mechanisms that are
involved
and instructions and teachings on
that this is a shift which is taking
place at the center of the collective
psyche
without going into too many layers of
the discussion now
this is not simply a shift in the
political arena or the social arena or
economic arena it is a shift in the core
substructure of the human psyche a shift
in the architecture
of the collective psyche
and we've been just as we collect all
our experiences over many incarnations
at the soul level
the human species has been collecting
and integrating its experiences at the
collective level at the unconscious
collective psyche level and what's
happening now is that we are pivoted
we're poised to make a pivot
in the collective psyche and that after
we make this pivot all human beings born
will be operating within the context of
a literally of a different collective
psyche
and i think we see the prototype of this
psyche in christ in buddha in muhammad
in these awakened beings who we have
been trying to emulate for generations
and generations
beings with
expanded hearts with expanded compassion
with expanded deeper insights into the
universe whose they speak differently
they don't work the way ordinary people
work they are different kinds of being
and i think we are becoming a different
kind of being
at least that's the consistent message
that comes through my work over and over
again it's literally breathtaking chris
a few
uh
with your confirmation i have to bring
you back at some point yeah because you
haven't i wouldn't say we haven't gotten
to the goodies oh my gosh it's been so
rich but
your chapter on the diamond luminosity
blew my socks off
your chapter on coming from down from
the mountain was brought me to tears i
have to bring you back to talk about
that because i don't want to dilute the
impact of what you're saying
by trying to do a shotgun
of i mean how do you distill 20 years of
unbelievable insight to even two hours
of conversation and so
to whatever extent i've been able to i
wanted to concentrate on a couple heart
essence points
add a little water to them so we could
understand them without
capitulating to my near frenetic
predisposition to like oh my gosh i have
to talk to him about this right
we'd be
going you're doing a great job you're
hitting really important topics we'd be
going at this mock one but
i wanted there's a couple things before
we close for today
that i want to return to that that i
think are somewhat important at least
they are to me um and two things here
one is
your journey seems to imply
or a type of
um
attainment in other words
we you're alluding to extraordinary
states
and
i'm not contesting that at all but i'm
wondering if if the languaging
the branding so some of the things that
that occurred to me using somewhat
marketing
methods is
one thing that needs to happen is this
whole thing needs to be rebranded this
whole lsd thing the branding thing is is
really so contaminated
with histories that we need to rebrand
it
as anthogenic practice or whatever but
the other thing that needs perhaps to be
rebranded and this is just me
i'm curious how this lands with you
is there seems to be this intimation
that you have
a left conventional reality at one level
you have and attain these states they're
extraordinary but is is it in fact chris
just as viable if not more so to say
that this is the extraordinary state in
other words this is the non-ordinary
state samsara
and that what you're actually doing in
your journey is is and this is a
narrative that keeps coming over and
over i loved it
the narrative of opening receiving
surrendering and and maybe for next time
not only opening
the uh the mind but just as much again
in terms of languaging the unbelievable
importance of opening the body and so as
a consequence of opening
and you mentioned this so many times i
was curious how how often you said this
dropping you open you drop so it's not a
journey of ascent so much as it is
awaking down
into really what are ordinary states
that that when you relax properly and
have the capacity to be so open what
you're talking about is completely
ordinary
that you're not really going anywhere
you're simply relaxing deeply into the
right here and out and so the reason i
say this chris is because one thing that
that i think could be a little bit
intimidating for people is oh my gosh i
can never do that i could never attain
that that's so far removed
i think if if you look at it in this
different way and i'm curious if this
lands with you it empowers the immediacy
of what you're talking about
that that
fundamentally this is the nature of the
mind this is the nature of the human and
even trans human condition
and so talk to us a little bit about the
the
almost the false note the false notion
of path because even the notion of path
needs to be rebranded here because that
implies you need to go somewhere else
and then the very striving you actually
ironically leave what you're trying to
attain
yeah really a whole notion of like you
attain enlightenment that's actually an
oxymoron you cannot attain enlightenment
they're mutually exclusive terms so a
lot of noodles against the wall but i
think important ones
because it also ties into the last thing
i wanted to say here
is you you also use the phrase a number
of times
of coming and going in other words you
enter the state you left it you entered
it you left it that also means a return
to some kind of source
so
i'm wondering about the relationship
here again i know i'm tossing a lot out
the relationship between source and
essence
in the relationship of all this to
recognition
it is in fact recognition not the
central message here that if you simply
open your mind and heart irrespective of
the means meditative
pharmacological or whatever if you
simply open and recognize
everything that seems to be intimated
here is oh geez i need to do this
20-year journey to attain this
provisionally maybe yes but absolutely
no it's right here right now you just
need to open your eyes divine eyes
and it's been here all along
yeah
i absolutely agree with you
um
in fact well
let me back up and there's a lot here
i'm sorry yeah
in the early stages of the journey there
is a subjective sense as one moves into
psychic level reality and subtle level
reality there is a subjective sense of
opening becoming larger opening and
becoming larger
and that's why i think psychedelics were
named mind opening it is a sensation of
opening the mind
late in the journey later at a more
advanced stage when i was working at
what stan would call causal level
reality yeah we can as well yeah
everything reversed i had the experience
that uh
my mind everything was converging
i was in very very large states of re
consciousness very very high energy
but instead of going deeper into those
states all everything was converging
back to right here right now my my
sessions were getting harder to describe
because they
they were so taking place inside
ordinary reality i wasn't being taken
outside everything was converging and i
began to think oh my god have we really
misclassified what these substances are
they're not mind openers they're mind
concentrators absolutely absolutely
and i think what happens is at different
levels of reality the subjective
experience changes
from opening to a concentration or it
may be the case that the consciousness
orchestrating my experience was bringing
me back into
what would more
be recognized as a more classical kind
of spiritual awakening but the core is
that it's really simply the case
a sashim
is you turn your mind and you focused on
the present
you you eliminate the outside and you go
right here right now and when you do
that this purification process happens
of course
but where you end up at the end
is simply where you were in the
beginning but with fewer distortions
yes elliot
yeah and you're just cleaning you're
cleaning
the macchio you're cleaning the
distortions but there's no place to go
there's no place else to go to
except where you already are and there's
nothing to become
except what you already are and always
have been you don't you know that
reality which doesn't begin it doesn't
end there's no turning on there's no
turning off there is only the relaxing
into what has always been
right here right now yeah and i think
that's that is true on
at least it was true in my experience on
the psychedelic path
i don't think
anything that i'm describing
is original
i think everything that i've described
in the book can be found in the
spiritual literature of the mystical
traditions the contemplative traditions
the cosmology that emerges in
psychedelic research is not a new
cosmology it's an old cosmology it's
it's only new in the context of its
emergence
and it leaves you
i say you know in somewhere in the end
stages of the book like
the only thing which is of value to me
in the psychedelic work
is purification
purification
and
just
purification bri and it because it
brings us into
a more intimate experience of
what already is
and
by some silly nonsense
we keep ourselves out
of the joy of this deep and profound
reality
that is living in us that is us that is
expressing itself
so i absolutely agree with you
yeah
it's yeah it's just purifying that's all
and again
not that this brings validity to what
you're saying other than the validity to
my world is
we
come and learn and understand things in
terms of other things
yeah and a logical knowing and so
what brought
such deep deep resonance was wow here's
an amazing individual who's taken an
entirely new path
that is so resonant with
my path and and again
completely aware of the hubris of saying
my breath be tokens the truth and
therefore yours is true because it
relates to mine right
this little subtle self-aggrandizement
there is actually not so subtle right
i think your stuff is true because it
resonates with my trip
totally aware of that yeah but with that
said um
there's so many resonances the the
notion of purification as you know
you're and this is what the question i
wanted to ask you
um
how as we start to close up for today
one of the the chapters or sections that
really spoke to me of course um somewhat
um preview by what i just said was your
interjection of the path of vajrayana
that and how that is now perhaps create
creating a again a holding environment
to support augment transition in more
and this i you understand hopefully the
question in more organic means more
phenomenological versus neurological
means
so-called traditional methods um yeah
and so
as we start to wrap up for today because
i want to give people something to take
home
like how can they
use this work with this and i have one
follow-up there but
what has been the role and continues to
be the role of both meditation and the
vajrayana
to augment support enhance stabilize
what you've gone through
well one of the gifts that came out of
my psychedelic
experiences was a deepened appreciation
of the power and effectiveness
of classic spiritual contemplative
practices
and including the vajrayana practices
uh by becoming sort of temporarily more
aware
i was able to appreciate more deeply
how these practices were affecting my
body and how they were affecting my mind
even though
and they also helped me manage some of
the challenges that i was running into
because remember i wasn't doing this
or
i didn't end up doing this work
for the purpose of spiritual awakening
though that was always there in the
background but i was doing it to explore
the universe as a philosopher hungary to
explore the nature of reality
but the vajrayana practices
helped me manage the excess of energy
that was having with being flowing
through my body
by giving it an intermediate place to
live and breathe that was like in
between my physical existence and my
psychedelic existence there was this
vadriana practice space
that of course taught me that these
power these practices are much more
powerful than i had appreciated or i
might have appreciated just from working
with them from my ordinary time space
consciousness
i also came to appreciate that these
practices are empowered by the
morphic fields which have been generated
by thousands and thousands of beings
doing these practices for hundreds and
hundreds of years the power of
transmission the lung when a practice is
given it's not just to maintain the
formal purity the practice but there
truly is an energetic transmission and
the power of this practice draws upon
the cumulative power that is set in
motion by thousands of beings using
these practices over many many years
now i don't know whether to describe
myself as a vajrayana practitioner today
[Music]
because while i do practice and i do
meditate
um
the focus of my
practice is different and in some ways
the focus of my practice
is actually speaking
there is a way in which
wow
when i speak about these things
i remember them when i remember them
they become actualized within me
when they become actualized within me my
mind shifts my body shifts everything
shifts inside of me
and so
actually for me
this wonderful discussion that we've
been having and i really really
appreciate the the
the deep
engaged quality of the questions you've
been asking me and where you've been
taking us
for me this is like a spiritual practice
for me your questions give me the
opportunity to open in ways that i
wouldn't ordinary i wouldn't be open
in today otherwise
in that context uh as part of my ongoing
effort to
simply to be useful
to the universe i practice i do my
practices
but i don't
practice
with the intention
of trying to accomplish something
and i don't practice with the intention
of
changing what's going to happen to me
when i die
now it may be arrogant to say this but i
just report that
i have a sense of what's going to open
to me when i die because i've been there
i've been there in different ways been
there done that right and
the universe has has made promises to me
and i don't think the promises are false
i think they're just very matter-of-fact
and so i don't practice
in order to
change what's going to happen to me when
i die
i practice to change
how i am right now
and to try to be of more use
to people
right now
so to kind of
declare my system to clear my system
uh
to remember
yeah and i used my psychedelic memories
in my vajrayana practice you know in
vajrayana you there's the samaya saatva
and the jananasatha the the being of
practice which attracts the being of
reality
and so we do these visualizations and
exercises and mudras in order to create
something which is an approximation of
an eternal principle by virtue of which
we draw that principle into our being
well
i use my memories
as samaya saatva
in the creation of samayasatva
in order to open the channels
to the jananasatha
of these principles in reality
you know and that to me is just
this is a this is a natural process so
it
i do the vajrayana practices but i do
them with my own particular kind of
twist
and understandably it's hard to find a
teacher
who is comfortable with somebody who's
owns the psychedelic history the way
mine
yeah and maybe maybe that needs to um
change and adapt i mean and who are we
to say that talk about the arrogance of
that because as you know chris and i'm
so glad to hear you say this there
actually have been in the wisdom
traditions admonitions
a warning against originality
that's very interesting to me that that
originality is somewhat suspicious and
i i i find that a very interesting
statement on one level yes it it it
abides by the elegance the beauty of the
tradition and the one level the sort of
irreducible irreducibility of the awaken
mind that's already been discovered and
i think
if it's a related to properly that can
prevent rogue
um
messiahs on the like but on another
level
if we don't evolve we're going to go
extinct if we don't bring
we meaning the wisdom traditions as a
representative of if we don't bring new
tributaries of upaya skillful means
cultural adaptations to perennial
traditions
then i think it's not going to be
applicable to the modern age and it's
just going to be relegated to the dusty
dispense in in dust bins in in old stale
churches but
um
well just a couple of things here before
we we close because i don't want to take
more advantage of your time but
we started with
this notion or i did with this notion of
hyper objects
um top uh issues topics
phenomena that are so big
it's hard to wrap one's mind around that
that you know i always say stretching is
good for growth this has been a journey
of a mental yoga
yeah
and i'm wondering if is it too
ostentatious to talk about
and i so appreciate your your humility
your modesty
but there's also tremendous power that
you're releasing that you are a shaman
to that you are expressing and i so
appreciate i've never really related to
this is
is also
speaking as practice dialogue is
practice engaging in what we're doing
here is path that's really beautiful
but would you say or is it fair to say
that you're also pointing towards and
this connects to your book the living
classroom
hyper pedagogy
are you in fact intimating a possibility
for accelerated forms of learning
and i resonate with this deeply because
when i explore what i call the nocturnal
meditations dream yoga and the like
one of the reasons i'm so passionate
about these practices is because they
are a revolution in pedagogy it's a way
to use the mind and the nocturnal arena
to really accelerate learning because
you're working with these foundational
dimensions and so is it fair to say
based on what your experience that
what you're also pointing to are
possibilities for hyper-pedagogical
approaches where
we can in fact accelerate our evolution
if it's held within the right view
within the right setting setting with on
the right container that we can really
ramp things up in a healthy way
with a but again with the bodhisattva
ideal and the motivations and all the
parameters of safety and security
because the faster you go this is the
net the essence of the majoriana it's a
jet versus a car
jets can crash cars are safer but
they're slower
is that a fair thing to say that if we
relate to this properly what you're also
pointing out here is not only just hyper
objects but hyper pedagogical approaches
i think so yeah you know in the living
classroom
i don't mention psychedelics at all i
wanted this book to be about fields of
consciousness and the effects of feels
on learning and the
the accelerating effect of focused
intentionality and energetic
transmission that takes place in the
classroom or in any group context and i
don't talk about psychedelics at all but
the back story to that book
is this
i was doing my private psychedelic
so-called private psychedelic practice i
was opening up into the ocean of
suffering i was going into these very
very deep collective states of
consciousness and eventually into deeper
you know transcendent states of
consciousness i never talked to my
students about it
but i found that my students began to be
impacted by my work in very precise ways
when i was going through certain
thresholds they began to go through
certain spiritual thresholds
and it began to happen
when i was lecturing nothing to do with
psychedelics just lecturing on world
religions just something
and i would be looking for some
example to use to make a point
and i experienced
a door open in the back of my mind the
way it first happened
and this little piece of paper slipped
into it i read the piece of paper and it
was an idea of something to use
and i i tried it and when i tried it all
of a sudden the energy in the room
shifted and everything became more
animated
and i began to work consciously with
these kind of
subtle
suggestions that would pop into my mind
from seemingly nowhere
and then
a few years down the road students
started to come to me and they said
at the end of class you know it's
strange that you said what you said
today or gave this example because this
is exactly what happened to me this week
or this is exactly what happened to my
mother
and at first i dismissed it i thought
okay
but it kept happening and it kept
happening
and the deeper my
psychedelic practice went
it began to happen more but it also
began to touch deeper areas of their
life
it was as if their soul was slipping
messages to my soul which was slipping
it to me
leading me to say things
that were giving them information or
touching
very intimate places in their life that
i had no way of personally knowing about
experiences that
places that they needed healing are
information that they needed to take the
next step in their learning
and this was became such a
characteristic part of my teaching so
many people were being moved in ways
that were beyond my conscious intention
and even beyond my awareness when it was
happening
and a pivot point came when i i looked
at my class one day while i was
lecturing
and i looked up and i saw
a half dozen ten people in the room with
very quietly tears
rolling down their face and i realized
i've got to understand what's happening
i i really have to understand this
and that's
the entire book
living classroom was downloaded in 10
minutes in one session the entire just
dropped right in and i've been wrestling
with this idea that but it gave me all
the information i need to understand two
basic points
but all of the both of them hinge around
the fundamental reality
that consciousness has an atomic quality
a separate quality and it has a quantum
quality
so there is individual awareness and
individual awareness is true they don't
know what i know
they're here to get what i know we give
a test and i can test whether they have
it you know that kind of stuff
but there's a quantum reality that my
individual experience is grounded in a
quantum in a an expansive field of
consciousness and they are grounded in
this expansive field of consciousness
and that activates
potentials
which are entirely natural it's like
throwing a stone into the water into a
lake and the ripple spread out when one
person does deep clarifying work
it triggers clarification in the
consciousness of people that they have
karmic connection to
it's a simple simple natural phenomenon
so i think
what i eventually
wrote down and and clarified was what
would it be like
if we taught consciously
in a transpersonal pedagogy or in an
integral pedagogy or in a pedagogy that
recognized the the innate
interconnectivity of consciousness
which doesn't mean that we abandon
the individual strategies that we know
and work so well but we incorporate
using strategies of focused
intentionality
of uh
of conscious of conscious engagement
that goes beyond classical teaching so
that for example
you know should as soon adriana practice
it's a purification practice
yep
and i'd learned should and i was doing
should for my spiritual practice i began
before class even began
when i would get a roster of the
students
for my class
i would start incorporating this roster
in my should practice i would literally
pray for my students using this
particular vehicle
i would pray for them and i pray for
them through the entire course
for their well-being not i don't try to
it's not my job
to think i know what's right for them or
what they should be doing or anything
like that i simply pray for their
well-being
i think
the more we kind of activate
these latent potentials in groups
the more we accelerate learning and i
found it's not only
the there's not only a collective field
in the room but there is a class field
but even deeper than that is the course
field
that there is a learning and empowerment
that takes place
over years
so that the students you have the
individual mind situated within a class
mine situated within a coarse mind
this is an
absolute once you see it once you
understand it you begin to recognize it
happening in all sorts of different
contexts in different places
so
if there is a hyper object
the hyper object is simply the
connective tissue of mind it's that we
are always always inherently connected
and we simply become conscious of that
and become responsible to it yeah in
whatever we're doing yeah and again it's
back to that narrative of making
unconscious process these processes and
making unconscious processes conscious
because if you can do that
then you can
increase levels of communication
elicitation
evocative
um whatever to then then really heighten
that what is what is already again it's
already there
so why not take advantage of it why not
engage it why not make it bring it into
conscious awareness pay allegiance to it
surrender to it and therefore enhance it
accelerate it in and of itself and so
chris i i want to pay homage to your
time
just a few
last things the famous last words wait a
second one more thing it'll be midnight
oh wait chris one more thing this is fun
i i mean i literally i could talk to you
for the entire day but
to wrap it up for now
um people are
what you're releasing here
is a pandora's box
of both wisdom and potential neurosis
and by this what i mean is um
i wonder if you worry about what you've
released here because here's here's a
little bit of where i want to close with
this is i can i'm definitely here
or
imagine listeners going
this is for me
i i
this is my path i want to do this and
and and they
may see this as a quick fix as a
lazy man's approach and of course your
book shows this is not for the
feeble-minded or the feeble-hearted
you have to this is jihad this is inner
dharma combat you have to really go to
work here so
what would you say like
dharmic surgeons general's warning these
teachings are hazardous to your egoic
health right
so i want to throw a little bit of a
caveat to listeners who go oh heck i
don't need to go into retreat i don't
need to do a three-year retreat i can
just pop these pills
and and i'm going to attain these states
and i knew there was a quick silver
bullet this is it so you understand it's
a slightly extreme rendering of this but
people climb under these sorts of things
and they're going to run into them run
with them with wrong motivation with
wrong
intent so talk to us as we close here
several things um
and this also ties into my experience i
have not done this yet but i've talked
to people who've done
ios good retreats in costa rica
they go down there they have these
mind-blowing experiences over four or
five
uh planned medicine trips
and then they leave and then they they
tell me i know these people they go it
was great but i don't feel supported
they don't follow up with me i'm left
completely to my own devices i am like
what do i do with that yeah so as we
close for today again lots of noodles
because
this topic is just so rich talk to us
about like if someone came to you
[Music]
would you act as an advisor or are there
advisors they can be drawn to do you
take responsibility for this pandora's
box of wisdom that you're releasing
what are the shadow sides of doing this
without proper sentence setting and so
i know i'm trying to close but i can't
help myself
i think this is important we have to
throw some
uh caveats out there for those who may
be thinking that ah this is the
long-awaited
spiritual silver bullet i'll just pop
these things and i'm good to go
yeah boy no silver bullet there are
there are no shortcuts in this
particular match that's what i've
learned there are no shortcuts
there are
intensifications of practice but there's
no getting around the fundamental laws
of spiritual reality you know that
there's just no getting around them and
the early idea that psychedelics
represented an easy path
uh it just turned out to be
facile and not true in fact my concern
is just the opposite my concern is that
if you use these substances even
conscientiously
they are they can be so intense
that uh it's too demanding a path it's
it's just too demanding you have to
really really be wise in the in the
handling of it
um
[Music]
i'm i was very concerned in
sharing this material because it would
break my heart
if someone were to read my book
and then jump into some type of use of
psychedelics and injure themselves and
it's easy to injure yourselves because
you you open you can open so deeply so
quickly
that you really can't handle
everything that comes at you and you can
you can disrupt a healthy psyche in ways
that can be permanently crippling it it
would break my heart if somebody did
that and i i did a lot of practice a
spiritual practice
around that particular issue
what we're learning is that breaking
through breaking the boundaries of the
personal psyche going into deeper states
of consciousness is really not that
difficult it's it's really
not that hard
we're beginning to see more and more
attention being given to integration
the the requirements of integration what
constitutes a healthy practice and i
offer myself as an example of someone
whose practice was not entirely healthy
i would think i went too deep and it's
cost me
years
of of kind of
i won't say distress but years of having
to
manage
the joy
that i had temporary that i knew on a
temporary basis so
and in it
one of the reasons i left the suffering
i you know i didn't blunt the suffering
in the book there were people who were
advising me don't put that in because
people are not going to get scared
they're not going to understand it one
of the reasons i put it in just because
it was true and i promised to give it an
accurate account
but i put it in partly because
i wanted people to be able to understand
how this stuff works how understands it
they are amplifiers amplifiers brings up
our garbage it brings up our trash we
have to confront that garbage confront
that trash but even when we do that and
do that well
we still have to manage the the wisdom
of integration
there is a book that was just published
this past year
in england it's inner tradition press
psychedelics and psychotherapy and the
focus of this book is really on
integration and i have an essay in there
with other people my essay is called the
challenge of integrating an extreme
psychedelic journey
not simply in a psychedelic session but
an extreme psychedelic journey
i think we need more essays like that we
need more discussions about what is good
what does healthy psychedelic practice
look like what are the symptoms of
imbalance in psychedelic practice what
is the symptom of too much
people chasing new experiences before
they've integrated the experiences that
they've had i've seen many students
suffering
they've literally fried themselves and
their energy feels very fried they've
gone back to the well too many times
they've plugged into the universe at too
high a level
and
they haven't stayed grounded they're
they they feel kind of crispy
they have paid a price and some people
truly have paid a price
of uh dysphoria
and various types of imbalance
psychological imbalance from entering
into these states so
the problem is you see that our culture
doesn't have a wisdom in the use of
psychedelics some indigenous cultures do
the shamanic cultures do have that
wisdom we have to learn from them how to
use these practices wisely right now
we're using these practices within a
therapeutic arena and we we're drawing
upon our therapeutic wisdom of how to
integrate these healing practices well
but as we go deeper we have to go beyond
therapeutic wisdom we have to go into
shamanic wisdom we have to go into the
sage tradition wisdoms to really learn
how to integrate these practices well
having deep experiences turns out is not
that difficult
and it's not necessarily very beneficial
it doesn't have a long lasting effect
julianna of norwich
english mystic had one she was on her
deathbed she was dying she had a
near-death experience she had an
experience of the love of christ and she
had an experience of of the feminine god
she spent the rest of her life
meditating on it and she unpacked one
experience in her book the revelations
of divine love
it takes years to unpack the full
potential that's unleashed in even one
experience
so
it would there we have a lot to learn
hopefully we will be wiser
in this century
with psychedelics than we were in the
last century in the 1960s where we did a
lot of psychedelics
we had a lot of experiences
a lot of breakthroughs a lot of cat some
casualties not as many as popular press
would have us believe
but did we change people's lives
profoundly and permanently some yes but
not as many as we thought would we would
i think we need to really be wise and
grounded
in our reappropriation of psychedelics
do you worry about what you've released
i mean one one thing that comes to mind
here is i i spent a lot of time in the
himalayas
i've trekked above
everest base camp i've seen a lot of
high altitude sickness and and so on one
level that's what this is like it's like
i've seen this where
when you're climbing to everest you've
got to spend two days
in namche bazaar for instance at 12 000
feet to acclimatize and the people that
don't
that don't acclimatize and go up they're
the ones that get high altitude cerebral
or pulmonary edema and run into very
serious problems and then the way they
have to cure it as you know
you get a headache
you stop
you go back down you retreat to an
altitude where the symptoms were not
there and then you slowly work your way
up otherwise the high altitude sickness
your lust for the summit will kill you
so
do you sometimes worry chris about again
what you release because on one level
this ties in so beautifully i think to
what we said it when i said the outside
because that's why it's beautiful
because i said it
is this is a form of tantra and it's
interesting yes i i just wrote an
article for tarka
is the west ready for tantra
and as a form of tantra as you know
there are practices that are
prescription strength tumo
uh dark retreat there are practices that
are does not design for public
consumption
because they're too powerful you're
you're you're dealing with thermonuclear
power
as it's embodied in your subtle body and
so you what you're talking about here is
the danger of what's called salon
practice in our yoga practice where
the the condensed
um
impact of your entire cosmic history is
encountered in your body and subtle body
and so when you're doing something like
this as the danger with doing inner
yogas and this is what your book
screamed out to me i said oh my gosh
chris is doing inner yoga here
and this is why not only is he opening
his mind he's opening his body and as
the channels wins chakras are open and
released whoa if you can't ride that
wind you're going to be blown away by
that wind and so i see this as a
absolutely confluent with these
prescription strength contract practices
yeah if you're not done with the proper
motivation proper sentence setting
really intelligently they're not going
to light you up they're going to burn
you up and so
again lots of things being thrown out
there but i think this is really
important especially in the impatient
west where people people are going to go
i'm just going to run with this
yeah do you worry about you worry about
what you've been there so to speak or
worry about it
uh
i made
first of all
that i do worry about it
um
[Music]
it's i'm glad we're talking about it i
hope i get opportunities to talk more
about it it needs to be discussed
the relationship between this high
potency psychedelic as a spiritual
practice but also as a in this you know
initiatory practice and the practices
that you're talking about as initiatory
practices they can burn you up
uh i got rather well singed and you know
had to manage them have had to manage
them
yeah
the other side of it is
the mother
asked me she said
you know we did not give you these
visions for you we gave them
for the people
she said
let them see me through your eyes
just just let me see let them see me
through your eyes as you have seen me
and it's like i am not important what's
important is
what was shown me
and i i hope that
by sharing that
cleanly and
honestly
it will help people in their own
spiritual development
that is my fundamental conviction my
fundamental motivation
as a philosopher
i trust my students to deal with the
information that i make available to
them even when it jars their system even
when it upsets their
cultural worldview
i work with them
to make sure that they don't get pushed
too hard that they integrate them this
is something that's a little different
this isn't a way
i've said something
i've not set it in motion it's happening
all around me i'm simply one voice which
is part of a psychedelic revolution it's
just one voice trying to bring some
clarity on one certain set of
issues i should also mention that i made
a choice a long time ago uh
not to function as a therapist not to
function as a clinician but to function
as an explorer
i do not work with other people i do not
work as a therapist i do not take people
in psychedelic sessions
i don't do that work that's a different
set of skills it requires training that
i don't have
i work with people who are training to
be those people
and there are lots and lots of places
where people are training to work as
psychedelic elders and as psychedelic
therapists
and i'm in conversations with some of
these training groups i'll be doing one
this coming weekend in fact
but i i've made a choice
to really work as an explorer
and to bring a report back
and to support other people who are
working as clinicians who are really
trying to
help people
use this material wisely
now as i said i think right now we're
learning the wisdom
in the therapeutic context
we still have to learn that wisdom
incorporate that wisdom into the
shamanic the shamanic wisdom and to
support integrate the wisdom that comes
from the sage tradition different levels
of depth
i just trust that we will find that
wisdom i hope there are not casualties
or not too many casualties along the way
in that process i do worry about it
i trust i just in the end i have to
trust that we will find the wisdom to do
this now my sense is we're going there
no matter what
psychedelics are here they're not going
away they didn't go away during the 40
years of prohibition they're not going
away now
what we need to do is accelerate and
deepen our understanding of how to what
they are how they work and how to work
with them well what they do and don't
give us and in my book i've really tried
to emphasize
the underbelly of psychedelics that they
are temporary that my chapter on
methodology is the path of temporary
immersion that's not the same as the
path of contemplative immersion
you really have to work with those
limitations and understand them to work
with them safely
and they are powerful and i i really
mean it i don't recommend that people
work with high doses of lsd
as consistently and methodically as i
did
i wouldn't do it that way again i would
be gentler with myself i would open up
smaller windows gentler substances lower
doses precisely because of the challenge
of sustaining the impact how these
experiences impact you not only in the
days immediately following your session
but in the years
following your session
yeah
you know so interesting uh
chris
you talked earlier about um
and this is a wonderful definition of a
translation of shannata emptiness is
translucency transparency
and one on one level you are the
exemplar of that transparency there's no
difference between the inner and outer
with you and and to me
it's really quite beautiful to see and i
also have to share
a little bit of the magic that i'm
feeling
um even in the conversation itself that
that and i hope my listeners take this
in the right way
some of these questions are not coming
from me i i can tell when i'm asking a
question
but i can also tell when these questions
aren't coming for me and so this next
one did not come from me
um
and i hope it's okay to ask this
in relationship to the beloved to the
mother
um
do you ever feel and
do you ever feel that you were brought
into this world
on behalf of the mother to act as her
child luminosity to act as that voice
i mean do you ever um look at your
trajectory as actually being a kind of
avatar of the mother itself
that you were brought to
again this idea of of purpose and
and divine purpose and teleology does
that does that speak to you around this
or do you feel this is a little bit more
sort of serendipitous uh i mean another
way you could say this in my languaging
is to what degree is karma
predispose you towards this but more
specifically using your languaging
do you think the beloved sent her child
into this world right now we're getting
really christian here man right yeah
tongue and cheek aside i think you i
hope you see where i'm coming from
i think that
before i answer the specific i want to
answer the general i think that
many of us at first i i believe that we
all knew what we were getting into
before we incarnated we have choices to
make and we choose our incarnation now
we may not choose it if we're if we're
kindergarteners we don't let them choose
their curriculum but by the time you're
in high school and college and graduate
school you're choosing your curriculum
and i think that this is true about
reincarnation too
we choose our incarnation we choose the
form of it we choose the timing of it we
choose the place of it we knew at a time
when we
knew more than we know now what we're
getting into
we said yes to the options of of this
incarnation so i think
this is
the lives that we are living
are
for the most part for the vast majority
i think are chosen lives
okay
and i think this is true for me and i
don't think
i certainly don't think i'm a
you know an ishtar for the for the
mother
but i have always considered myself in
service of the mother i'm in it's in my
astrological chart it's in my
constitutional chart
i
i wanted to be you know my first
vocation in life was to be a priest i
woke up when i woke up at five or six
years old i wanted to be a priest and i
was raised catholic and that's how it
expressed itself
um but that fell away but the desire to
serve the desire to know and to serve
was always there as it is for many of us
and so
i also learned along the way uh not in
my psychedelic work but actually in some
hypnotic work i was doing in past life
therapy work that i have history with
psychedelics i have native american
history with psychedelics it's what made
me comfortable
with this mode of spiritual practice
so i i believe
that i was born to do what i did
and that's that's not inflationary
that's just it's just very simple this
this is what i did what came naturally
to him
uh and it's no big deal it's just what
is
uh
i love to teach
just so happened that it took a little
bit of a twist and i'll add one other
little small piece there's been great
benefit to me in this in that
i also learned that i have had a number
of lives
where i paid a price for speaking i was
tortured and killed for speaking out and
so i i was internalized i i brought that
resistance in this lifetime and it's not
been easy from the first time i wrote on
reincarnation
i had to overcome great resistance but
what i found was that
by overcoming that resistance and
speaking the truth as best as i could
understand it
it always worked out well it always
i was always richly rewarded for the
process so there's been
soul learning for me
and rising to the challenge of doing
this it's not been easy to write about
psychedelics in our particular culture
but look at the the friendships that
it's given me the context it has given
me the opportunities to be with people
has been very rewarding and i think
i think there are a lot lots and lots
and lots of people who are like me like
yourself who have deep deep spiritual
hunger spiritual drive
and they they do it and as they get into
it
they're not holding this just for
themselves they are truly bodhisattvas
they're doing this practice
for everybody first thing you do in a
practice awaken bodhichitta
and the last thing you do in your
practice is you distribute the merit
you know this is this is just the nature
of reality this is just the very simple
process of waking up to the true
condition which is a shared existence
that we all that we all embody
yeah
breathtaking breathtaking chris really
um
how can people learn more about you
again i'm going to i'm probably going to
say
one more thing and we're going to be
here until midnight um but
how can people learn more about you um
what are you currently working on how
can we support you part part of what we
do
my aspiration is cross-pollination is
bringing bringing this chorus of sanity
so that we can increase connectivity
enhance the connective tissue um
strengthen it and into whatever degree
possible at whatever levels of reality
overt
or covert
support each other so how can my
community learn more about you support
you in your journey and what are you
currently working on that we can look
forward yeah
well
it's very kind of you uh to ask that
i just finished uh teaching a seven-week
course at the shift network which is
basically a seven week
course built around
lsd in the mind of the universe
and that course is now um
is available and people
can get that course and download it and
there's
an hour lecture followed by half an hour
q a and
you know there's material there and
there's also readings there that they
can
go into
uh i have a website chrisbash.com it's
unfinished
but it's there and if you want to get
access to some of my talks or some of
the things i've written
they're there
uh i don't do a bulletin
um
i am right now uh still absorbing uh the
feedback from the course i did with the
shift network i probably will do some
more teaching with them
uh i will probably be having
conversations like we're having now for
people who want to have the kind of
conversations that
flow out of
critical psychedelic practice and with a
spiritual twist to it
i look forward when
covid allows us to gather together in
groups
to do retreats
i happen to live outside of asheville
where there are lots of retreat centers
around here and i hope that there'll
come a time
when people can gather we can gather
physically for
long weekend or week-long retreats where
we can just
enter into
the discussion
uh more deeply
i don't have any immediate plans for
that
i'm just
i live kind of in a responsorial mode
uh you wanted to have a conversation i'm
delighted to have this conversation
but i just ought to wait until things
come to me
uh and
we'll take it from there beautiful
beautiful
well chris i just like with your book
you're i'm left with just this
um
perfume this this sense of awe and
wonder it
it really the magic and mystery of the
entire affair
the the surrender to some whatever you
want a pen hyper object i mean that's a
silly not a silly word but a shrink wrap
word for the inf ability
the the elegance the beauty the magic of
this world and your your presence
really embodies to me and that's why so
much i wanted to do this not just merely
audit audit um with audit
auditory means but also visual means is
you're doing something right
right
and
your your mere presence conveys the the
kind of authenticity if i may be so
presumptuous
of what you've done and what you've
elected to be is your path and we are
the beneficiaries of your the diamonds
that you're throwing across this planet
and so on behalf of my community
really thank you for taking time out of
your busy life to spend
um some time with us and i'm just left
somewhat breathless um taking the
insights that you shared it's really
truly deeply inspiring and i don't paper
these words out lightly it's really
mind-bending mind-blowing and what a
tremendous gift
your courage and your beauty has brought
to this world so deep deep thanks my
friend until until next time i'm really
touched andrew thank you very much and
um
thank you for your work
thank you for the goodness that you're
spreading for the for the ideas that
you're seeding and it's really been an
honor
to be in conversation with you today
thank you my words and maybe we can do
it again in this dimension or another so
all the best until next time my friend
sounds good okay much love